# SPOOL Improvement Proposal 001


## Abstract

This proposal discusses details for allowing the implementation
of unlimited editions in the SPOOL ownership API.

## Requirements

    - An API user must be able to bulk create a set of unlimited editions for a piece in a single
      HTTP request
    - An API user must be able to repeatedly create a set of unlimited editions
      for a piece using HTTP requests
    - An API user is not required to know about concurrent edition creation
      processes running on a piece they try to create editions on
      (meaning an API user can submit a request for creating editions, and even
      though this process is still running, can send another request for
      creating more editions)
    - An API user must be able to create a distinct set of editions which
      numbers do neither need to be in order, nor do they need to be consecutive
      (All these examples shall be valid: [1, 2, 3], [3, 1, 2], [3, 1])
    - An API user must be able to `freeze` or limit the unlimited editions of a
      piece using a single HTTP request
    - An API user must be able to track the creation of editions of a piece
      using a pub-sub mechanism (e.g. using websockets, instead of polling)


## Problem

Currently when creating editions, a user can make use of two endpoints:

    1. Set `num_editions` when registering a piece `POST /api/pieces`
    2. Set `num_editions` and `piece_id` using `POST /api/editions`

When calling either of those endpoints, the user currently creates a set of
limited editions in the range of 1 and the value of `num_editions` and a SPOOL
ownership action (in the form of a Bitcoin transaction) is triggered.

For allowing unlimited editions to be implemented the following changes (that are
not up for discussion in this SIP) will be made to the SPOOL protocol:

    - When registering editions, a SPOOL `OwnershipEditions` Bitcoin transaction
      will not be sent to the Bitcoin network immediately
    - When doing actions(transfer, consign, loan) on a previously
      registered/created edition, ownership actions on the Bitcoin network will
      be recorded as usual
    - When the user decides to limit his unlimited editions (we call this a
      `freeze` action) a SPOOL `OwnershipEditions` Bitcoin transaction will be
      sent to the Bitcoin network

As this change needs to be implemented in version 0 of the API, its changes must
not break the current endpoint's behavior. This exposes the following constraint:

    - Using `num_editions` in `POST /api/pieces` and `POST /api/editions` still
      needs to register a limited set of editions in a range of 0 to the value
      of `num _editions`


## Solution

### Creation of unlimited editions

Using `POST /api/pieces/1234/editions/` an API user can create a distinct set of unlimited
editions using the following payload:

```javascript
POST /api/pieces/1234/editions/

    {
        "numbers": [2, 1, 5, 59]
    }
```

As mentioned in the requirements, here `numbers` just specifies the
edition numbers to be created. The numbers do not need to be ordered or
consecutive.

In response, the API returns a payload of the following form:


```javascript
202 Accepted

    {
        "notification": "We've succesfully received your request of registering
        editions 1, 2, 5, 59 for piece 1234.",
        "websocket": "ws://ascribe.io/api/pieces/1234/editions"
    }
```

In this case, a user of the API can use the `websocket` property of
the response to listen in on the execution of the ongoing asynchronously
executing task.
Eventual mistakes of the API user's input, as for example submitting an edition
number for an edition that has already been created in a previous request are
all broadcasted only through this channel.
Semantically wrong request content though, will only stop execution of the
edition number in question, not the creation of all editions in the request.

For example, assume the first request of this section went through successfully.
Say, we make another request (btw. we do not need to wait for completion of the
first request's tasks):


```javascript
POST /api/pieces/1234/editions/

    {
        "numbers": [2]
    }
```

Note, that this is the second time the API user requests the creation of
edition 2 for piece 1234.
Still, the API will respond with the above proposed schema (202 Accepted), but
will eventually tell the API user via the provided websocket in the response that
edition 2 could not have been registered, as it was already.


### Freezing a set of unlimited editions

Using `POST /api/pieces/1234/editions/`, submitting `num_editions` an API user
is able to freeze/limit the unlimited editions of a piece.

```javascript
PATCH /api/pieces/1234/

    {
        "num_editions": 59
    }
```

Note that here `num_editions` needs to be at least greater than the greatest
number used before when creating a set of unlimited editions.
As we only registered the editions 1, 2, 5, 59 in previous example, this
implies that when calling freeze on piece 1234, the server will create all
remaining editions in the range of 2 - 58 (with the exception of 5).

In turn this means, that the endpoint could be called with `num_editions` > 0 before
ever calling the edition registration endpoint, and would still create all editions in a range
of 1 and value of `num_editions` (which is intended behavior!).

Similarly to the response of creating unlimited editions, the response for
freezing them returns:

```javascript
202 Accepted

    {
        "notification": "We've succesfully received your request of registering
        editions 2, 3, 4, 6, ..., 58 for piece 1234.",
        "websocket": "ws://ascribe.io/api/pieces/1234/editions"
    }
```


## Comments

The old endpoints:

    1. Set `num_editions` when registering a piece `POST /api/pieces`
    2. Set `num_editions` and `piece_id` using `POST /api/editions`

will stay existent and create a limited set of editions.
They will however be removed from the public documentation, in order to phase
them out in the long term, as the proposed endpoints are able to fulfill their tasks.

Note that eventually, an API call for creating editions when registering a piece
will not exist anymore.
This change was proposed intentionally, as we value separation of concerns in
API calls.
